[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [Getting Started with
MySQL](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/getting-started-with-mysql/) » What Is
MySQL



 **Summary** : this tutorial helps you answer the question: what is MySQL? And
give you the reasons why MySQL is the world’s most popular open-source
database.



To understand MySQL, you first need to understand the database and SQL. If you
already know database and SQL, you can jump to the _What is MySQL_ section.



You deal with data every day…



When you want to listen to your favorite songs, you open your playlist from
your smartphone. In this case, the playlist is a database.



When you take a photo and upload it to your account on a social network like
Facebook, your photo gallery is a database.



When you browse an e-commerce website to buy shoes, clothes, etc., you use the
shopping cart database.



Databases are everywhere. So what is a database? By definition, a database is
merely a structured collection of data.



The data relating to each other by nature, e.g., a product belonged to a
product category and associated with multiple tags. Therefore, we use the term
**relational database**.



In the relational database, we model data like products, categories, tags,
etc., using tables. A table contains columns and rows. It is like a
spreadsheet.



A table may relate to another table using a relationship, e.g., one-to-one and
one-to-many relationships.



Because we deal with a significant amount of data, we need a way to define the
databases, tables, etc., and process data more efficiently. Besides, we want
to turn the data into information.



And this is where SQL comes to play.



SQL stands for the structured query language.



SQL is the standardized language used to access the database.



ANSI/SQL defines the SQL standard. The current version of SQL is SQL:2016.
Whenever we refer to the SQL standard, we mean the current SQL version.



SQL contains three parts:



Now, you understand database and SQL, and it’s time to answer the next
question…



MySQL? What?



My is the daughter’s name of the [MySQL’s co-founder, Monty
Widenius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Widenius).



The name of MySQL is the combination of My and SQL, MySQL.



MySQL is a database management system that allows you to manage relational
databases. It is open source software backed by Oracle. It means you can use
MySQL without paying a dime. Also, if you want, you can change its source code
to suit your needs.



Even though MySQL is open source software, you can buy a commercial license
version from Oracle to get premium support services.



MySQL is pretty easy to master in comparison with other database software like
Oracle Database, or Microsoft SQL Server.



MySQL can run on various platforms UNIX, Linux, Windows, etc. You can install
it on a server or even in a desktop. Besides, MySQL is reliable, scalable, and
fast.



The official way to pronounce MySQL is _My Ess Que Ell, not My Sequel._
However, you can pronounce it whatever you like, who cares?



If you develop websites or web applications, MySQL is a good choice. MySQL is
an essential component of the LAMP stack, which includes Linux, Apache, MySQL,
and PHP.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

