

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL CROSS JOIN



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn about the MySQL `CROSS JOIN`
clause and how to use it more effectively.



Suppose you join two tables using the `CROSS JOIN` clause. The result set will
include all rows from both tables, where each row is the combination of the
row in the first table with the row in the second table. In general, if each
table has `n` and `m` rows respectively, the result set will have `nxm` rows.



In other words, the `CROSS JOIN` clause returns a Cartesian product of rows
from the joined tables.



The following illustrates the syntax of the `CROSS JOIN` clause that joins two
tables `t1` and `t2`:


    
    
    SELECT * FROM t1
    CROSS JOIN t2;



Note that different from the [`INNER
JOIN`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-inner-join.aspx), [`LEFT
JOIN`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-left-join.aspx) , and `[RIGHT
JOIN](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-right-join/)` clauses, the `CROSS
JOIN` clause does not have a join predicate. In other words, it does not have
the `ON` or `USING` clause.



If you add a `WHERE` clause, in case table `t1` and `t2` has a relationship,
the `CROSS JOIN` works like the `INNER JOIN` clause as shown in the following
query:


    
    
    SELECT * FROM t1
    CROSS JOIN t2
    WHERE t1.id = t2.id;
    



Let’s set up some tables to demonstrate the `CROSS JOIN` clause.



First, [create a new database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-
database/) `salesdb`:


    
    
    CREATE DATABASE IF NOT EXISTS salesdb;



Second, switch the current data to the new database `salesdb`:


    
    
    USE salesdb;



Third, [create new tables](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)
in the `salesdb` database:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE products (
        id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
        product_name VARCHAR(100),
        price DECIMAL(13,2 )
    );
    
    CREATE TABLE stores (
        id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT,
        store_name VARCHAR(100)
    );
    
    CREATE TABLE sales (
        product_id INT,
        store_id INT,
        quantity DECIMAL(13 , 2 ) NOT NULL,
        sales_date DATE NOT NULL,
        PRIMARY KEY (product_id , store_id),
        FOREIGN KEY (product_id)
            REFERENCES products (id)
            ON DELETE CASCADE ON UPDATE CASCADE,
        FOREIGN KEY (store_id)
            REFERENCES stores (id)
            ON DELETE CASCADE ON UPDATE CASCADE
    );



Here are the descriptions of the three tables:



Finally, insert data into the three tables. Suppose that we have three
products `iPhone`, `iPad` and `Macbook Pro` which are sold in two stores
`North` and `South`.


    
    
    INSERT INTO products(product_name, price)
    VALUES('iPhone', 699),
          ('iPad',599),
          ('Macbook Pro',1299);
    
    INSERT INTO stores(store_name)
    VALUES('North'),
          ('South');
    
    INSERT INTO sales(store_id,product_id,quantity,sales_date)
    VALUES(1,1,20,'2017-01-02'),
          (1,2,15,'2017-01-05'),
          (1,3,25,'2017-01-05'),
          (2,1,30,'2017-01-02'),
          (2,2,35,'2017-01-05');
    



This statement returns total sales for each store and product, you calculate
the sales and [group ](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-group-by.aspx)them
by store and product as follows:


    
    
    SELECT 
        store_name,
        product_name,
        SUM(quantity * price) AS revenue
    FROM
        sales
            INNER JOIN
        products ON products.id = sales.product_id
            INNER JOIN
        stores ON stores.id = sales.store_id
    GROUP BY store_name , product_name; 
    

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-CROSS-JOIN-GROUP-BY-example.png)


Now, what if you want to know also which store had no sales of a specific
product. The query above could not answer this question.



To solve the problem, you need to use the `CROSS JOIN` clause.



First, use the `CROSS JOIN` clause to get the combination of all stores and
products:


    
    
    SELECT 
        store_name, product_name
    FROM
        stores AS a
            CROSS JOIN
        products AS b;

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-CROSS-JOIN-stores-and-products.png)


Next, join the result of the query above with a query that returns the total
of sales by store and product. The following query illustrates the idea:


    
    
    SELECT 
        b.store_name,
        a.product_name,
        IFNULL(c.revenue, 0) AS revenue
    FROM
        products AS a
            CROSS JOIN
        stores AS b
            LEFT JOIN
        (SELECT 
            stores.id AS store_id,
            products.id AS product_id,
            store_name,
                product_name,
                ROUND(SUM(quantity * price), 0) AS revenue
        FROM
            sales
        INNER JOIN products ON products.id = sales.product_id
        INNER JOIN stores ON stores.id = sales.store_id
        GROUP BY stores.id, products.id, store_name , product_name) AS c ON c.store_id = b.id
            AND c.product_id= a.id
    ORDER BY b.store_name;
    

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-CROSS-JOIN-query-example.png)


Note that the query used the [`IFNULL`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
ifnull/) function to return 0 if the revenue is
`[NULL](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-null/)` (in case the store had no
sales).



By using the `CROSS JOIN` clause this way, you can answer a wide range of
questions e.g., find the sales revenue by salesman, month even if the salesman
has no sales in a particular month.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

