

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL DELETE JOIN



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, we will show you how to delete data from
multiple tables by using **MySQL DELETE JOIN** statement.



In the previous tutorial, you learned how to delete rows of multiple tables by
using:



This tutorial introduces to you a more flexible way to delete data from
multiple tables using [`INNER JOIN`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
inner-join.aspx) or [`LEFT JOIN`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-left-
join.aspx) clause with the `DELETE` statement.



MySQL also allows you to use the `INNER JOIN` clause in the `DELETE` statement
to delete rows from a table and the matching rows in another table.



For example, to delete rows from both `T1` and `T2` tables that meet a
specified condition, you use the following statement:


    
    
    DELETE T1, T2
    FROM T1
    INNER JOIN T2 ON T1.key = T2.key
    WHERE condition;



Notice that you put table names `T1` and `T2` between the `DELETE` and `FROM`
keywords. If you omit `T1` table, the `DELETE` statement only deletes rows in
`T2` table. Similarly, if you omit`T2` table, the `DELETE` statement will
delete only rows in `T1` table.



The expression `T1.key = T2.key` specifies the condition for matching rows
between `T1` and`T2` tables that will be deleted.



The condition in the `WHERE` clause determine rows in the `T1` and `T2` that
will be deleted.



Suppose, we have two tables `t1` and `t2` with the following structures and
data:


    
    
    DROP TABLE IF EXISTS t1, t2;
    
    CREATE TABLE t1 (
        id INT PRIMARY KEY AUTO_INCREMENT
    );
    
    CREATE TABLE t2 (
        id VARCHAR(20) PRIMARY KEY,
        ref INT NOT NULL
    );
    
    INSERT INTO t1 VALUES (1),(2),(3);
    
    INSERT INTO t2(id,ref) VALUES('A',1),('B',2),('C',3);

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/MySQL-DELETE-JOIN.png)


The following statement deletes the row with id 1 in the `t1` table and also
row with `ref` 1 in the `t2` table using `DELETE...INNER JOIN` statement:


    
    
    DELETE t1,t2 FROM t1
            INNER JOIN
        t2 ON t2.ref = t1.id 
    WHERE
        t1.id = 1;



The statement returned the following message:


    
    
    2 row(s) affected



It indicated that two rows have been deleted.



We often use the `[LEFT JOIN](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-left-
join.aspx)` clause in the `SELECT` statement to find rows in the left table
that have or don’t have matching rows in the right table.



We can also use the `LEFT JOIN` clause in the `DELETE` statement to delete
rows in a table (left table) that does not have matching rows in another table
(right table).



The following syntax illustrates how to use `DELETE` statement with `LEFT
JOIN` clause to delete rows from `T1` table that does not have corresponding
rows in the `T2` table:


    
    
    DELETE T1 
    FROM T1
            LEFT JOIN
        T2 ON T1.key = T2.key 
    WHERE
        T2.key IS NULL;



Note that we only put `T1` table after the `DELETE` keyword, not both `T1` and
`T2` tables like we did with the `INNER JOIN` clause.



See the following `customers` and `orders` tables in the sample database:

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/12/customers_orders_tables.png)


Each customer has zero or more orders. However, each order belongs to one and
only one customer.



We can use `DELETE` statement with `LEFT JOIN` clause to clean up our
customers master data. The following statement removes customers who have not
placed any order:


    
    
    DELETE customers 
    FROM customers
            LEFT JOIN
        orders ON customers.customerNumber = orders.customerNumber 
    WHERE
        orderNumber IS NULL;



We can verify the delete by finding whether customers who do not have any
order exists using the following query:


    
    
    SELECT 
        c.customerNumber, 
        c.customerName, 
        orderNumber
    FROM
        customers c
            LEFT JOIN
        orders o ON c.customerNumber = o.customerNumber
    WHERE
        orderNumber IS NULL;



The query returned an empty result set which is what we expected.



In this tutorial, you have learned how to use the MySQL `DELETE JOIN`
statement to delete data from two or more tables.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

