

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL TRUNCATE TABLE



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to use the MySQL `TRUNCATE
TABLE` statement to delete all data in a table.



The MySQL `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement allows you to delete all data in a table.



Logically, the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement is like a
`[DELETE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-delete-statement.aspx)`
statement without a `[WHERE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-where/)`
clause that deletes all rows from a table, or a sequence of `[DROP
TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-drop-table)` and `[CREATE
TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)` statements.



However, the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement is more efficient than the `DELETE`
statement because it drops and recreates the table instead of deleting rows
one by one.



Here is the basic syntax of the`TRUNCATE TABLE` statement:


    
    
    TRUNCATE [TABLE] table_name;



In this syntax, you specify the name of the table which you want to remove all
data after the `TRUNCATE TABLE` keywords.



The `TABLE` keyword is optional. However, it is a good practice to use the
`TABLE` keyword to distinguish between the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement and the
`[TRUNCATE()](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-math-functions/mysql-
truncate/)` function.



If there is any `[FOREIGN KEY](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-foreign-
key/)` constraints from other tables which reference the table that you
truncate, the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement will fail.



Because a truncate operation causes an implicit commit, therefore, it cannot
be rolled back.



The `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement [resets value in the AUTO_INCREMENT column
](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-reset-auto-increment)to its start value
if the table has an `AUTO_INCREMENT` column.



The `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement does not fire `DELETE` triggers associated with
the table that is being truncated.



Unlike a `DELETE` statement, the number of rows affected by the `TRUNCATE
TABLE` statement is 0, which should be interpreted as no information.



Let’s take an example of using the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement.



First, [create a new table](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)
named `books` for the demonstration:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE books (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
    )  ENGINE=INNODB;



Next, insert dummy data to the `books` table by using the following [stored
procedure](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-stored-procedure-tutorial.aspx
"MySQL Stored Procedure"):


    
    
    DELIMITER $$
    CREATE PROCEDURE load_book_data(IN num INT(4))
    BEGIN
    	DECLARE counter INT(4) DEFAULT 0;
    	DECLARE book_title VARCHAR(255) DEFAULT '';
    
    	WHILE counter < num DO
    	  SET book_title = CONCAT('Book title #',counter);
    	  SET counter = counter + 1;
    
    	  INSERT INTO books(title)
    	  VALUES(book_title);
    	END WHILE;
    END$$
    
    DELIMITER ;
    



Then, load 10,000 rows into the `books` table. It will take a while.


    
    
    CALL load_book_data(10000);



After that, check the data in the `books` table:


    
    
    SELECT * FROM books;



Finally, use the `TRUNCATE TABLE` statement to delete all rows from the
`books` table:


    
    
    TRUNCATE TABLE books;



Note that you can compare the performance between the `TRUNCATE TABLE` with
the `DELETE` statement.



In this tutorial, you have learned how to use the MySQL `TRUNCATE TABLE`
statement to delete all data from a table efficiently, especially for a large
table.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

