

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » How To Use The MySQL
Generated Columns



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to use the MySQL generated
columns to store data computed from an expression or other columns.



When you create a new table, you specify the table columns in the `[CREATE
TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)` statement. Then,
you use the `[INSERT](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-
statement.aspx)`, [`UPDATE`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-update-
data.aspx), and `[DELETE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-delete-
statement.aspx)` statements to modify directly the data in the table columns.



MySQL 5.7 introduced a new feature called the _generated_ column. Columns are
generated because the data in these columns are computed based on predefined
expressions.



For example, you have the `contacts` with the following structure:


    
    
    DROP TABLE IF EXISTS contacts;
    
    CREATE TABLE contacts (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
        last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
        email VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
    );



To get the full name of a contact, you use the
`[CONCAT()](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/sql-concat-in-mysql.aspx)` function
as follows:


    
    
    SELECT 
        id, 
        CONCAT(first_name, ' ', last_name), 
        email
    FROM
        contacts;



This is not the most beautiful query yet.



By using the MySQL generated column, you can recreate the `contacts` table as
follows:


    
    
    DROP TABLE IF EXISTS contacts;
    
    CREATE TABLE contacts (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        first_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
        last_name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
        fullname varchar(101) GENERATED ALWAYS AS (CONCAT(first_name,' ',last_name)),
        email VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL
    );



The `GENERATED ALWAYS as (expression)` is the syntax for creating a generated
column.



To test the `fullname` column, you
[insert](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-statement.aspx) a row into
the `contacts` table.


    
    
    INSERT INTO contacts(first_name,last_name, email)
    VALUES('john','doe','john.doe@mysqltutorial.org');



Now, you can [query data](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-select-
statement-query-data.aspx) from the `contacts` table.


    
    
    SELECT 
        *
    FROM
        contacts;

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/MySQL-generated-column-example.png)


The values in the `fullname` column are computed on the fly when you query
data from the `contacts` table.



MySQL provides two types of generated columns: stored and virtual. The virtual
columns are calculated on the fly each time data is read whereas the stored
column are calculated and stored physically when the data is updated.



Based on this definition, the `fullname` column that in the example above is a
virtual column.



The syntax for defining a generated column is as follows:


    
    
    column_name data_type [GENERATED ALWAYS] AS (expression)
       [VIRTUAL | STORED] [UNIQUE [KEY]]



First, specify the column name and its data type.



Next, add the `GENERATED ALWAYS` clause to indicate that the column is a
generated column.



Then, indicate whether the type of the generated column by using the
corresponding option: `VIRTUAL` or `STORED`. By default, MySQL uses `VIRTUAL`
if you don’t specify explicitly the type of the generated column.



After that, specify the expression within the braces after the `AS` keyword.
The expression can contain literals, built-in functions with no parameters,
operators, or references to any column within the same table. If you use a
function, it must be scalar and deterministic.



Finally, if the generated column is stored, you can define a [unique
constraint](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-unique-constraint/) for it.



Let’s look at the `products` table in the [sample
database](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sample-database.aspx).

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/products.png)


The data from `quantityInStock` and `buyPrice` columns allow us to calculate
the stock’s value per SKU using the following expression:


    
    
    quantityInStock * buyPrice



However, we can add a stored generated column named `stock_value` to the
`products` table using the following [`ALTER TABLE ...ADD
COLUMN`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-add-column/) statement:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE products
    ADD COLUMN stockValue DOUBLE 
    GENERATED ALWAYS AS (buyprice*quantityinstock) STORED;



Typically, the `ALTER TABLE` statement requires a full table rebuild,
therefore, it is time-consuming if you change the big tables. However, this is
not the case for the virtual column.



Now, we can query the stock value directly from the `products` table.


    
    
    SELECT 
        productName, 
        ROUND(stockValue, 2) stock_value
    FROM
        products;

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/MySQL-generated-column.png)


In this tutorial, you have learned how to use the MySQL generated column to
store data computed from an expression or other columns.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

