

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL Primary Key



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to use **MySQL primary
key** constraint to create the primary key for a table.



A primary key is a column or a set of columns that uniquely identifies each
row in the table. The primary key follows these rules:

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/mysql-primary-key.png)


Because MySQL works faster with integers, the [data
type](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-data-types.aspx) of the primary key
column should be the integer e.g., `[INT](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
int/), ``BIGINT`. And you should ensure sure that value ranges of the integer
type for the primary key are sufficient for storing all possible rows that the
table may have.



A primary key column often has the
`[AUTO_INCREMENT](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-sequence/)` attribute
that automatically generates a sequential integer whenever you [insert a new
row](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-statement.aspx) into the
table.



When you define a primary key for a table, MySQL automatically [creates an
index](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-index/mysql-create-index/) called
`PRIMARY`.



The `PRIMARY KEY` constraint allows you to define a primary key of a table
when you [create](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/) or alter
table.



Typically, you define the primary key for a table in the `[CREATE
TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)` statement.



If the primary key has one column, you can use the `PRIMARY KEY` constraint as
a column constraint:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE table_name(
        primary_key_column datatype PRIMARY KEY,
        ...
    );



When the primary key has more than one column, you must use the `PRIMARY KEY`
constraint as a table constraint.


    
    
    CREATE TABLE table_name(
        primary_key_column1 datatype,
        primary_key_column2 datatype,
        ...,
        PRIMARY KEY(column_list)
    );



In this syntax, you separate columns in the `column_list` by commas (,).



The `PRIMARY KEY` table constraint can be used when the primary key has one
column:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE table_name ( 
        primary_key_column datatype, 
        ... ,
        PRIMARY KEY(primary_key_column)
    );



The following example [creates a table](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
create-table/) named `users` whose primary key is the `user_id` column:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE users(
       user_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
       username VARCHAR(40),
       password VARCHAR(255),
       email VARCHAR(255)
    );



This statement creates the `roles` table that has the `PRIMARY KEY` constraint
as the table constraint:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE roles(
       role_id INT AUTO_INCREMENT,
       role_name VARCHAR(50),
       PRIMARY KEY(role_id)
    );



In case the primary key consists of multiple columns, you must specify them at
the end of the `CREATE TABLE` statement. You put a comma-separated list of
primary key columns inside parentheses followed the `PRIMARY KEY` keywords.



The following example creates the `user_roles` table whose primary key
consists of two columns: `user_id` and `role_id`. It defines the `PRIMARY KEY`
constraint as the table constraint:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE user_roles(
       user_id INT,
       role_id INT,
       PRIMARY KEY(user_id,role_id),
       FOREIGN KEY(user_id) 
           REFERENCES users(user_id),
       FOREIGN KEY(role_id) 
           REFERENCES roles(role_id)
    );



Note that the statement also created two [foreign
key](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-foreign-key/ "MySQL Foreign Key")
constraints.



If a table, for some reasons, does not have a primary key, you can use the
`[ALTER TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-alter-table.aspx)`statement
to add a primary key to the table as follows:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE table_name
    ADD PRIMARY KEY(column_list);



The following example adds the `id` column to the primary key.



First, create the `pkdemos` table without a primary key.


    
    
    CREATE TABLE pkdemos(
       id INT,
       title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
    );



Second, add a primary key to the `pkdemos` table using the `ALTER TABLE`
statement:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE pkdemos
    ADD PRIMARY KEY(id);



If you add a primary key to a table that already has data. The data in the
column(s), which will be included in the primary key, must be unique and not
NULL.



`KEY` is the synonym for `INDEX`. You use the `KEY` when you want to [create
an index](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-index/mysql-create-index/) for a
column or a set of columns that is not the part of a primary key or [unique
key](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-unique/).



A `[UNIQUE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-unique/)` index ensures that
values in a column must be unique. Unlike the `PRIMARY` index, MySQL allows
`NULL` values in the `UNIQUE` index. In addition, a table can have multiple
`UNIQUE` indexes.



Suppose that `email` and `username` of users in the `users` table must be
unique. To enforce thes rules, you can define `UNIQUE` indexes for the `email`
and `username` columns as the following statement:



Add a `UNIQUE` index for the `username` column:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE users
    ADD UNIQUE INDEX username_unique (username ASC) ;



Add a `UNIQUE` index for the `email` column:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE users
    ADD UNIQUE INDEX  email_unique (email ASC) ;



In this tutorial, you have learned how to create a primary key for a new table
or add a primary key to an existing table.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

