

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL NOT NULL
Constraint



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to define a `NOT NULL`
constraint for a column, add a `NOT NULL` constraint to an existing column,
and remove a `NOT NULL` constraint from a column.



The `NOT NULL` constraint is a column constraint that ensures values stored in
a column are not `[NULL](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-null/)`.



The syntax of defining a `NOT NULL` constraint is as follows:


    
    
    column_name data_type NOT NULL;
    



A column may contain only one `NOT NULL` constraint which specifies a rule
that the column must not contain any `NULL` value. In other words, if you
[update](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-update-data.aspx) or
[insert](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-statement.aspx) `NULL`
into a `NOT NULL` column, MySQL will issue an error.



The following [`CREATE TABLE`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-
table/) statement creates the `tasks` table:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE tasks (
        id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
        title VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
        start_date DATE NOT NULL,
        end_date DATE
    );
    



In the `tasks` table, we explicitly define the `title` and `start_date`
columns with `NOT NULL` constraints. The `id` column has the [`PRIMARY
KEY`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-primary-key/) constraint, therefore,
it implicitly includes a `NOT NULL` constraint.



The `end_date` column can have `NULL` values, assuming that when you create a
new task, you may not know when the task can be completed.



It’s a good practice to have the `NOT NULL` constraint in every column of a
table unless you have a good reason not to do so.



Generally, the `NULL` value makes your queries more complicated because you
have to use functions such as `[ISNULL()](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
isnull-function/)`, `[IFNULL()](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-ifnull/)`,
and `[NULLIF()](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-nullif/)` for handling
`NULL`.



Typically, you add `NOT NULL` constraints to columns when you create the
table. Sometimes, you want to add a `NOT NULL` constraint to a NULL-able
column of an existing table. In this case, you use the following steps:



Consider the following example.



The following statement [inserts some
rows](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-multiple-rows/) into the
`tasks` table for the demonstration.


    
    
    INSERT INTO tasks(title ,start_date, end_date)
    VALUES('Learn MySQL NOT NULL constraint', '2017-02-01','2017-02-02'),
          ('Check and update NOT NULL constraint to your database', '2017-02-01',NULL);
    



Suppose that you want to force users to give an estimated end date when
creating a new task. To implement this rule, you add a `NOT NULL` constraint
to the `end_date` column of the `tasks` table.



First, use the `[IS NULL](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-is-null/)`
operator to find rows with `NULLs` in the column `end_date` :


    
    
    SELECT * 
    FROM tasks
    WHERE end_date IS NULL;  
    

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-NOT-NULL-example.png)


The [query](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-select-statement-query-
data.aspx) returned one row with `NULL` in the column `end_date`.



Second, [update](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-update-data.aspx) the
`NULL` values to non-null values. In this case, you can make up a rule that if
the `end_date` is `NULL`, the end date is one week after the start date.


    
    
    UPDATE tasks 
    SET 
        end_date = start_date + 7
    WHERE
        end_date IS NULL;
    



This query verifies the update:


    
    
    SELECT * FROM tasks;
    

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-NOT-NULL-Update-NULL-values.png)


Third, add a `NOT NULL` constraint to the `end_date` column using the
following [`ALTER TABLE`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-alter-
table.aspx) statement:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE table_name
    CHANGE 
       old_column_name 
       new_column_name column_definition;
    



In this case, the name of the old and new column names are the same except
that the column must have a `NOT NULL` constraint:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE tasks 
    CHANGE 
        end_date 
        end_date DATE NOT NULL;
    



Let’s verify the change by using the
[`DESCRIBE`](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-show-columns/) statement:


    
    
    DESCRIBE tasks;
    

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/MySQL-NOT-NULL-Add-to-existing-column.png)


As you see, the `NOT NULL` constraint was added to the `end_date` column
successfully.



To drop a `NOT NULL` constraint for a column, you use the `ALTER
TABLE..MODIFY` statement:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE table_name
    MODIFY column_name column_definition;
    



Note that the column definition (column_definition) must restate the original
column definition without the `NOT NULL`constraint.



For example, the following statement removes the `NOT NULL` constraint from
the `end_date` column in the `tasks` table:


    
    
    ALTER TABLE tasks 
    MODIFY 
        end_date 
        end_date DATE NOT NULL;



To ensure that the statement actually removed the `NOT NULL` constraint, you
can use the `SHOW CREATE TABLE` command to view the full column definition:

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/MySQL-NOT-NULL-constraint-removal-example.png)

    
    
    DESCRIBE tasks;

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/MySQL-NOT-NULL-constraint-describe.png)


In this tutorial, you have learned how to define a `NOT NULL` constraint for a
column, add a `NOT NULL` constraint to a column, and remove a `NOT NULL`
constraint from a column.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

