

[Home](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/) » [MySQL
Basics](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-basics/) » MySQL CHECK Constraint



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to use MySQL `CHECK`
constraint to ensure that values stored in a column or group of columns
satisfy a Boolean expression.



MySQL 8.0.16 implemented the SQL check constraint. If you use MySQL with the
earlier versions, you can [emulate a `CHECK`
constraint](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-check-constraint-emulation/)
using a [view](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-views-tutorial.aspx) `WITH
CHECK OPTION` or a [trigger](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
triggers.aspx).



Prior to MySQL 8.0.16, the `[CREATE
TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-create-table/)` allows you to
include a table `CHECK` constraint. However, the `CHECK` constraint is just
parsed and ignored:


    
    
    CHECK(expression)



As of MySQL 8.0.16, the `[CREATE TABLE](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
create-table/)` supported essential features of table and column `CHECK`
constraints for all [storage
engines](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/understand-mysql-table-types-innodb-
myisam.aspx).



Here is the syntax:


    
    
    [CONSTRAINT [constraint_name]] CHECK (expression) [[NOT] ENFORCED]
    



In this syntax:



First, specify the name for the check constraint that you want to create. If
you omit the constraint name, MySQL automatically generates a name with the
following convention:


    
    
    table_name_chk_n



where `n` is an ordinal number 1,2,3… For example, the names of `CHECK`
constraints for the `parts` table will be `parts_chk_1`, `parts_chk_2`, …



Second, specify a Boolean `expression` which must evaluate to `TRUE` or
`UNKNOWN` for each row of the table. If the expression evaluates to `FALSE`,
the values violate the constraint or a constraint violation occurs.



Third, optionally specify enforcement clause to indicate whether the check
constraint is enforced:



As mentioned earlier, you can specify a `CHECK` constraint as a table
constraint or column constraint.



A table `CHECK` constraint can reference multiple columns while the column
`CHECK` constraint can refer to the only column where it is defined.



Let’s take some examples of using the `CHECK` constraints.



This statement creates a new `parts` table:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE parts (
        part_no VARCHAR(18) PRIMARY KEY,
        description VARCHAR(40),
        cost DECIMAL(10,2 ) NOT NULL CHECK (cost >= 0),
        price DECIMAL(10,2) NOT NULL CHECK (price >= 0)
    );



In this statement, we have two column `CHECK` constraints: one for the cost
column and the other for the price column.



Because we did not explicitly specify the names for the `CHECK` constraints,
MySQL automatically generated names for them.



To view the table definition with the `CHECK` constraint name, you use the
`SHOW CREATE TABLE` statement:


    
    
    SHOW CREATE TABLE parts;



Here is the output:

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/mysql-check-constraint.png)


As you can see clearly from the output, MySQL generated the check constraint
`parts_chk_1` and `parts_chk_2`.



Once the `CHECK` constraints are in place, whenever you
[insert](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-insert-statement.aspx) or
[update](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-update-data.aspx) a value that
causes the Boolean expression evaluates to false, MySQL rejects the change and
issues an error.



This statement inserts a new row into the parts table:


    
    
    INSERT INTO parts(part_no, description,cost,price) 
    VALUES('A-001','Cooler',0,-100);



MySQL issued an error:


    
    
    Error Code: 3819. Check constraint 'parts_chk_2' is violated.



Because the value of the `price` column is negative which causes the
expression `price > 0` evaluates to `FALSE` that results in a constraint
violation.



First, drop the `parts` table:


    
    
    DROP TABLE IF EXISTS parts;



Then, create a new `parts` table with one more table `CHECK` constraint:


    
    
    CREATE TABLE parts (
        part_no VARCHAR(18) PRIMARY KEY,
        description VARCHAR(40),
        cost DECIMAL(10,2 ) NOT NULL CHECK (cost >= 0),
        price DECIMAL(10,2) NOT NULL CHECK (price >= 0),
        CONSTRAINT parts_chk_price_gt_cost 
            CHECK(price >= cost)
    );



The following new clause defines a table `CHECK` constraint that ensures the
price is always greater than or equal to cost:


    
    
    CONSTRAINT parts_chk_price_gt_cost CHECK(price >= cost)



Because we explicitly specify the name for the `CHECK` constraint, MySQL just
creates the new constraint with the specified name.



Here is the definition of the `parts` table:


    
    
    SHOW CREATE TABLE parts;

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/mysql-check-constraint-table-constraint-example.png)


The table `CHECK` constraint appears at the end of the table definition after
the column list.



This statement attempts to [insert](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/mysql-
insert-statement.aspx) a new part whose price is less than cost:


    
    
    INSERT INTO parts(part_no, description,cost,price) 
    VALUES('A-001','Cooler',200,100);



Here is the error due to the constraint violation:


    
    
    Error Code: 3819. Check constraint 'parts_chk_price_gt_cost' is violated.



In this tutorial, you have learned about the MySQL `CHECK` constraints to
ensure values stored in a column satisfy a Boolean condition.

![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


All MySQL tutorials are practical and easy-to-follow, with SQL script and
screenshots available. [More About Us](/about-us/)

