[Home](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/) » [Getting Started with
MongoDB](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/getting-started/) » What is MongoDB



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will briefly learn about MongoDB and its
features.



MongoDB is an open-source, cross-platform, distributed document database.
MongoDB is developed by [MongoDB Inc](https://www.mongodb.com/company). and
categorized as a NoSQL database.



MongoDB is a document-oriented database. It uses the concept of the document
to store data, which is more flexible than the row concept in the relational
database management system (RDBMS).



A document allows you to represent complex hierarchical relationships with a
single record.



MongoDB doesn’t require predefined schemas that allow you to add to or remove
fields from documents more quickly.



When the database grows, you’ll have a challenge of how to scale it. There are
two common ways:



MongoDB was designed to scale out.



MongoDB allows you to split data across many servers. It also automatically
manages the load balancing across the cluster, redistributing data, and
routing updates to the correct servers.



The following picture illustrates how MongoDB scale-out using sharding across
multiple servers:

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/what-is-mongodb-scale-out.png)


Like any database system, MongoDB allows you to insert, update, and delete,
and select data. In addition, it supports other features including:



Note that you will learn more about these features in detail in the next
tutorial.



MongoDB was designed to maintain the high performance from both architecture
and feature perspectives.



The philosophy of MongoDB is to create a full-featured database that is
scalable, flexible, and fast.



MongoDB has three editions: community server, enterprise server, and atlas.



The MongoDB Community Edition is free and available on Windows, Linux, and
macOS.



MongoDB Community Edition uses the [Server Side Public
License](https://www.mongodb.com/licensing/server-side-public-license) (SSPL).
It means that if you offer MongoDB as a service to the public, you need to
open the source code of the software that makes the service works e.g.,
administration and monitoring tools. Otherwise, you need to pay for the
enterprise subscription.



If you use the MongoDB Community Edition as a component of your application,
not the final product, you are free to use it.



MongoDB Enterprise Server is a commercial edition of MongoDB as a part of the
MongoDB Enterprise Advanced subscription.



MongoDB Atlas is a global cloud database service. It is a database as a
service that allows you to focus on building apps rather than spending time
managing the databases.



MongoDB Atlas is available on common cloud platforms such as AWS, Azure, and
GCP. MongoDB Atlas has a free tier for your experiments.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


Copyright © 2022 by mongodbtutorial.org Website. All Right Reserved.

