

[Home](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/) » [Getting Started with
MongoDB](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/getting-started/) » Install MongoDB



 **Summary** : in this tutorial, you will learn how to install the MongoDB
database server and its tools on your local system.



First, visiting the [download
page](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/community) on the mongodb.com
website.



Second, click the On-Premises (MongoDB on your own infrastructure tab)

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Download-MongoDB.png)


Third, select the MongDB Community Server.



Finally, select the version, platform, and click the download button to
download the installation file.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Download-MongoDB-Windows.png)


First, double-click the downloaded file to launch the setup wizard. Click the
Next button to start setting up MongoDB.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-1.png)


Second, accept the terms in the License Agreement and click the Next button:

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-2.png)


Third, click the **Complete** button to install all program features. If you
want to select which features to install and where they will be installed,
select the Custom button. However, this option is recommended for advanced
users only.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-3.png)


Fourth, select Install MongoD as a service and click the Next button.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-4.png)


Fifth, uncheck the **Install MongoDB Compass** checkbox and click the **Next**
button. If you select it, the setup wizard will also install the MongoDB
Compass with the community version.



MongoDB Compass is a GUI tool that allows you to interact with MongoDB server
including querying, indexing, document validation, and more.



MongoDB Compass has several versions. Like MongoDB, the community version
always is free, but with limited features.



The good news is that [starting from April 30, 2020, the full version of
MongoDB Compass is free for all](https://www.mongodb.com/blog/post/compass-
now-free-for-all). You will learn how to download and install MongoDB Compass
in the next section.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-5.png)


Sixth, click the Install button to start the installation.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-6.png)


The install will take some minutes to complete.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-7.png)


Seventh, click the **Finish** button to exit the setup wizard.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/install-mongodb-on-windows-step-8.png)


You follow these steps to download MongoDB Compass:



First, visit the [download page on the mongodb.com
website](https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/compass).



Second, select the MongoDB Compass tool.



Third, select the stable version to download. Note that the version that you
see on the website may be higher than the version on the following screenshot:

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/download-mongodb-compass.png)


First, double-click the installer file to launch the MongoDB Compass Setup
Wizard and click the Next button.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Install-Compass-Windows-Step-1.png)


Second, select the destination folder and click Next to install to the default
folder which is `C:\Program Files\MongoDB Compass`

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Install-Compass-Windows-Step-2.png)


Third, click the Install button to begin the installation.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Install-Compass-Windows-Step-3.png)


Fourth, once the installation is completed, click the Finish button to exit
the Setup Wizard.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Install-Compass-Windows-Step-4.png)


You’ll find the MongoDB Compass in the Start menu.



To launch the MongoDB Compass, click the MongoDB Compass icon. The following
shows the main screen of the MongoDB Compass.



To connect to the local MongoDB Server, click the **Connect** button:

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Launch-Compass-Windows.png)


If everything is fine, you will see the following screen:

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Launch-Compass-Windows-Main-Screen.png)


In this tutorial, you’ve learned step by step how to install the MongoDB
server and MongoDB Compass on your computer. Now, you’re ready to learn about
MongoDB.

![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/left.svg)
![](https://www.mongodbtutorial.org/wp-content/themes/evolution/img/right.svg)


Copyright © 2022 by mongodbtutorial.org Website. All Right Reserved.

